CI/CD Pipeline for Frontend and Backend using Jenkins

Overview

This repository contains a Jenkins pipeline to automate the CI/CD process for a generic frontend and backend application. The pipeline handles code building, testing, packaging, and deployment for both frontend and backend. The workflow ensures modularity, error handling, and best practices for scalable deployments.

Pipeline Stages

1️⃣ Code Checkout

Fetches the latest code from the Git repository.

2️⃣ Static Code Analysis

Runs ESLint or TSLint for frontend code.

Uses SonarQube or CodeQL for backend analysis.

Fails the build if any critical code issues are found.

3️⃣ Build and Test

Frontend: Installs dependencies and runs unit tests using npm/yarn.

Backend: Builds and runs unit tests (e.g., pytest for Python, JUnit for Java).

Test Reporting: Publishes test results as artifacts in Jenkins.

4️⃣ Package and Archive

Frontend: Bundles the application assets using npm run build or yarn build.

Backend: Builds a Docker image and pushes it to a Docker registry.

Jenkins Artifacts: Archives build artifacts for traceability.

5️⃣ Deploy to Staging

Deploys frontend assets to a CDN or web server.

Deploys the Dockerized backend to a staging environment (e.g., Kubernetes, AWS ECS, Docker Compose).

Ensures environment-specific configurations are applied using .env files.

6️⃣ Automated Tests on Staging

Runs integration tests to validate end-to-end functionality.

Performs performance testing using Apache JMeter or Gatling.

Publishes test results.

7️⃣ Approval for Production

Configures a manual approval step in Jenkins.

Only on approval, the pipeline proceeds to deploy to production.

8️⃣ Deploy to Production

Deploys the latest tested frontend and backend version to production.

Uses zero-downtime strategies like blue-green deployment or canary release.

Repository Structure

/app
├── frontend              # React, Angular, or Vue.js frontend
│   ├── src
│   ├── package.json
│   └── Jenkinsfile       # Jenkins pipeline for frontend
└── backend               # Node.js, Python, or Java backend
    ├── src
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── requirements.txt  # For Python dependencies (if applicable)
    └── Jenkinsfile       # Jenkins pipeline for backend

Installation & Setup

1️⃣ Clone the Repository

 git clone https://github.com/your-repo-name.git
 cd your-repo-name

2️⃣ Configure Jenkins

Install the following plugins in Jenkins:

Pipeline

SonarQube Scanner

Docker Pipeline

Blue Ocean

JMeter Plugin (for performance tests)

3️⃣ Set Up Environment Variables

Configure the following environment variables in Jenkins:

DOCKER_REGISTRY=your-docker-registry
AWS_CDN_URL=your-cdn-url
STAGING_SERVER=staging.example.com
PRODUCTION_SERVER=prod.example.com

4️⃣ Run the Jenkins Pipeline

Create a Jenkins Pipeline Job and select Pipeline from SCM.

Provide the repository URL.

Specify the Jenkinsfile location (/Jenkinsfile).

Run the pipeline.

Deployment Strategy & Rollback Plan

1️⃣ Blue-Green Deployment

Deploys the new version to a standby (green) environment.

Traffic is switched from the current (blue) environment to the green environment after testing.

If issues arise, traffic is switched back to blue.

2️⃣ Canary Release

Rolls out the new version to a small percentage of users first.

If stable, gradually increases traffic to 100%.

If issues arise, reverts traffic to the old version.

3️⃣ Rollback Strategy

If deployment fails, automatically reverts to the previous stable version.

Docker containers use version tags to support rollback (docker tag v1.0, v1.1, etc.).

Jenkins automatically triggers a rollback in case of failure.

Contributing

Fork the repository.

Create a feature branch (git checkout -b feature-branch).

Commit your changes (git commit -m 'Add new feature').

Push to the branch (git push origin feature-branch).

Open a Pull Request (PR).

License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.
